Add UFLx language draft (#18)
garth-wells/uflx: LANGUAGE.md

# Minimal UFLx language definition

> This note describes the smallest useful language model behind legacy UFLx. It intentionally avoids implementation details, compiler algorithms, and broad redesign ideas.

Reviewer: What do we mean by "legacy UFLx"?

## 1. What UFLx is

UFLx is a symbolic language embedded in Python for writing finite-element variational forms.

A UFLx program is ordinary Python code that constructs symbolic objects. The important result is usually a `Form`, such as a bilinear form, linear form, or functional.

UFLx is not a full PDE language. It does not own the actual mesh, boundary markers, numerical values of coefficients, or assembly procedure. Those belong to the surrounding problem-solving environment, such as DOLFIN or DOLFINx.

In one sentence:

> > UFLx is a typed symbolic expression language for finite-element integrals.

Reviewer 2: Not just integrals, general expressions as well? I guess you can say that `ufl.interpolate(some_expr, V)` is an integral in the sense that it can be thought of as a projection.

However, the general `ufl.core.expr.Expr` that we for instance use for `dolfinx.fem.Expression` is not tied to integrals, rather to an individual cell in N-dimensional space.

Author: Changed this now to "... language for finite-element forms." Form should be the most general object we want to represent, as that allows for non-integral type of forms. The legacy perspective of forms being of integral nature should be abandoned, see the definition of the Form below.

## 2. The minimal object model

The minimal language needs only a small number of object kinds.

### Finite elements

A finite element describes the local finite-dimensional field used on a cell.

At minimum, an element is defined by:

- the cell type,
- the element family,
- the polynomial degree or equivalent order information,
- the value shape,
- and, for mapped elements, the required pullback or mapping behaviour.

Examples:

```python
P1 = FiniteElement("Lagrange", triangle, 1, ())
vP2 = FiniteElement("Lagrange", triangle, 2, (2,))
```

> The element says what kind of discrete field is being represented. It does not store actual coefficient values.

Reviewer: The actual finite element class isn't in UFL or UFLx, we only provide the base class which a subclass of is implemented in element libraries. This section reads a bit like we want to keep the `FiniteElement` class that used to be in UFL, but I can't see a sensible way to rewrite it without adding implementation details about ABCs

Author: So implementation of that can live in an external library, yes. But the language needs to define what is a finite element from its perspective, to be able to statically check statements. Also, when I say "object" in this document I mean language object, not a Python object.

If you think about what is minimum required to know about a finite element, just a value shape and maybe some regularity/continuity (to see if differentiation or restriction is valid) would be enough. Only when thinking of transformation i.e. pullback, or quadrature rule estimation, that more is needed.

### Domains and meshes

> A domain or mesh is the integration domain of a form. For a minimal language definition, a domain only needs to provide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Domains

A domain is the integration domain of a form. For a minimal language definition, a domain only needs to provide:
```

I'm trying to avoid using to work mesh to make it clearer that UFL doesn't need the actual mesh, just information about what cells it contains

Reviewer 2: In ufl it's always been called a domain, but it does require something about what cells can be neighbours to each other for mixed topology

- topological dimension,
- geometric dimension,

> - and a coordinate element, if geometry is represented symbolically.

Reviewer 2: A mesh could consist of multiple coordinate elements, with potenially different topological dimension.
The geometric dimension between the different coordinate elements sould be shared.

> if the geometry is represented symbolically

Do you have a use-case where one wouldn't represent the geometry symbolically?

Reviewer: maybe:

```suggestion
- topological dimension,
- geometric dimension,
- and a coordinate element, if geometry is represented using a finite element.
```

The actual mesh is still external to UFLx.

### Function spaces

A function space combines a domain with a finite element.
Conceptually:

```python
V = FunctionSpace(mesh, element)
```

In older examples, `Argument` and `Coefficient` are sometimes created directly from an element. This is not allowed.

### Terminals

Terminals are the leaves of UFLx expression trees.

The essential terminals are:

- `Argument`, representing an arbitrary basis/test/trial function,
- `Coefficient`, representing a user-supplied discrete function,
- literals such as numbers,
- and geometric quantities such as coordinates, normals, Jacobians, cell diameter, facet area, etc.

Example:

```python
v = TestFunction(V, name="v")
u = TrialFunction(V, name="u")
f = Coefficient(V, name="f")
```

> > Legacy note: There is no `Constant` in UFLx as a means to represent literal value which is not known at compile time.

Reviewer 2: Why would we not have `Constant`'s in UFLx? They are super neat and important to avoid re-compilation.
A bigger question is if a `Constant` should be tied to a mesh or not (ref the whole real element vs `ufl.constant.Constant` vs `ufl.constantvalue.ScalarValue` discussion)

Author: This is also a bit open.

My point is that if you want an object to exist in the language itself, it should add something to the language. So when you make a language statement, the language can detect if it is valid or not. And `Coefficient` is already semantically the right object which has a specific value not known at compile time. The only problem is that Coefficient is a member of FunctionSpace which is defined using finite elements, so a "Real" element does not fit too well, as it is not a finite element in the sense of a local support. It more suggests that one should allow more flexible definition of a FunctionSpace.

Reviewer 2: MeshlessCoefficient and Coefficient then, where a meshless coefficient is a base class for coefficient? Meshless objects are also very convenient for multigris type algorithms

Author: Actually, even earlier, I had in mind a non-FE function space. Something along
```python
R = ConstantFunctionSpace(shape=(2, ))  # a space of R^2, or C^2
c = Coefficient(R, name="c")
```
It would be very useful to allow non-FE based spaces be in the language.

Reviewer 2: There is also the function space of simple functions, which would be nice to support: https://github.com/scientificcomputing/scifem/blob/f8dd671317e606c06e053839446a475a3909f173/src/scifem/spaces.py#L40

Author: Could even be just the same `FunctionSpace` constructor, just with no element provided. For example `FunctionSpace(domain, shape=...)` would be a space of function over a domain. For transformations it would need to know about quad. rule and pullback etc., thats for the future. For now I think we need to say that `FunctionSpace(mesh, element) | FunctionSpace(shape)` is valid.

Author: Added the `FunctionSpace` idea to respective section.

UFLx supports named symbolic terminals. This allows for better error messages and better postprocessing of expressions. In addition, it improves the stability of the expression tree.

> Legacy note: In legacy UFL, symbolic objects do not have names. It requires expensive and error prone renumbering of terminals in expressions before lowering and code generation.

### Expressions

An expression is either a terminal or an operator applied to other expressions.

Examples of operators are addition, multiplication, indexing, `grad`, `div`, `dot`, `inner`, `jump`, and `avg`.

Expressions are symbolic. They are not evaluated when they are created.

A minimal expression carries these static properties:

- tensor shape,
- free indices,
- index dimensions,
- associated domain or domains,
- scalar type (real or complex),
- continuity information,
- (possibly) physical dimension.

These properties are enough to reject many meaningless expressions before lowering or code generation.

### Measures

A measure describes where and how an integrand is integrated.

TODO.

The standard measures are:

- `dx` for cell integrals,
- `ds` for exterior-facet integrals,

> - `dS` for interior-facet integrals.

Reviewer 2: What would an interior facet integral be on a T-joint or N-jointed mesh?
Following this line, what about the `dP` and `dR` measures (peak and ridges), and how should one distinguish between "interior" and "exterior" for those?

Reviewer: I wonder if the measure interface could store only a dimension or codimension and an id - we can then leave it up to the library using the form (ie DOLFINx) to decide which cells to provide to each kernel based on the ids it used

Reviewer 2: You would need to know something about how many restrictions is required as well, 0,...N

Examples:

```python
dx
ds
dS
```

### Integrals

An integral is made by multiplying a scalar expression by a measure.

Examples:

```python
v * f * dx
inner(grad(v), grad(u)) * dx
jump(v) * dS
```

A valid integral has a scalar-valued integrand with no unresolved free indices.

### Forms

A form is a multi-linear functional $a(u, v, w, \ldots): V_1 \times V_2 \times V_3 \times \ldots \to \mathbb{R}$.

> Arguments determine the arity of a form. A form with no arguments is a functional. A form with one argument is a linear form. A form with two arguments is a bilinear form.

Reviewer: Or is it sesquilinear if it's complex?

Or someone could make a nonlinear form (eg `inner(u, u) * dx`) so maybe these names are not always relevant

Author: Removed these as unnecessary. The big point is we see a form as a multi-linear functionals, not necessarily a sum of integrals. The example `inner(u, u)*dx` is more of a nonlinear functional $V \to \mathbb R$, but we would also call it 0-linear form (useless name though).

> > Legacy note: In contrast to the legacy UFL, in UFLx a form does not need to be defined as a sum of integrals. For example, the following is a valid UFLx form: `a = (u * dx) * (v * dx)`, or `a = PointEvaluation(u, (0.5, 0.5)) * PointEvaluation(v, (0.5, 0.5))`.

Reviewer 2: Interesting, `PointEvaluation` hasn't really been mentioned before in this document.

Author: I did not list all possible operators. This is just an example of non-integral based bilinear form. Anything like PointEvaluation would definitely not make into first minimal versions.

> > Legacy note: In contrast to the legacy UFL, in UFLx a form does not need to be defined as a sum of integrals. For example, the following is a valid UFLx form: `a = (u * dx) * (v * dx)`, or `a = PointEvaluation(u, (0.5, 0.5)) * PointEvaluation(v, (0.5, 0.5))`.

Reviewer 2: Should one mentioned that different expressions could be evaluated on different meshes here?
i.e. you could have a function $u\in V(\Omega)$, $v\in Q(\Pi)$ and `J = u * v * dx(domain=Omega)`?

Author: When it comes to transformation of expressions between meshes, and their restriction etc. I think we should follow a rule that only when it is very obvious and trivial the implicit operations should happed.

For example, if you add two functions, say in vector Lagrange space and in RT space, the operation of addition is not well defined in the vector space sense. But we do not want to bother. What we really mean in that case is that both are trivially embedded in a larger space, $L^2$, and the addition is  interpreted there.

I explicitly added the domain information as static language attribute. That means, that language should check if you are multiplying expressions on two different domains. That should raise an error. Or if you integrate over yet another domain. Should raise as well. We need to provide means to do these domain transfers and restriction as part of the language. This is in the core semantics. So I can imagine `J = u * restrict(v, omega) * dx`. Again, how exactly the restriction is done is not part of the language. The language checks that the expression being formed is on the same domain.

Reviewer 2: These kind of restrictions is quite similar to what I do in:

https://github.com/scientificcomputing/fenicsx_ii

Reviewer 2: Furthermore codim-N integrals (conforming meshes of codim N=,...tdim) should be possible to do with no restriction. Otherwise multiphysics, Lagrange multipliers etc will be a handful

Examples:

```python
a = inner(grad(v), grad(u)) * dx
L = v * f * dx
F = a - L
```

## 3. Minimal validity rules

The language is small, but it is typed.

- Addition and subtraction require compatible shapes and compatible free indices.
- Multiplication follows scalar, tensor, matrix-vector, matrix-matrix, and indexed-expression rules.
- Tensor contractions such as `dot` and `inner` require compatible tensor shapes.
- Spatial derivatives require a spatial domain.
- Facet quantities such as `FacetNormal` are only meaningful in facet integration contexts.
- Interior-facet expressions may use side restrictions:
    ```python
    u("+")
    u("-")

>     ```

Reviewer 2: > - Interior-facet expressions may use side restrictions:
>     ```python
>     u("+")
>     u("-")
>     ```

This is something i think is fundamentally wrong in the old UFL implementation, and deserves much more attention if re-implemented. Why only two restrictions and why plus and minus to distinguish between them? In general, using strings rather than enums (we could now even use StrEnum https://docs.python.org/3/library/enum.html#enum.StrEnum) helps for:
1. Readability and understanding what is supported in the code.
2. Validation of inputs.

1. Automatic/symbolic differentiation.

   Similar to UFL, UFLx provides a symbolic differentiation via a directional (Gateaux) derivative. The derivative of an Expression, Integral or a Form is lazy/eagerly evaluated. That means the derivative is stored as an expression tree operator, and the actual differentiation is performed when the derivative is used in a context where it needs to be evaluated, such as lowering or code generation.

   Example:

   ```python
    a = inner(grad(v), grad(u)) * dx
    da = derivative(a, u, du)
    ```

2. Expression and integral transformation between different configurations.

   > Legacy note: In legacy UFL, there is a very central perspective on the configuration of where objects are defined. Usually, all expressions are defined in the physical configuration, and UFL applies pullbacks to the entire expression tree.

   In UFLx, configuration where expressions are defined are a consequence of the domain. Since the domain is part of the Expression's static attributes, it is propagated through the expression tree based on the language rules.

   TODO.

## 5. What belongs to the language

The minimal language includes:

> - symbolic finite-element objects,

Reviewer: Base class for this, not the actual objexts

Author: Maybe I answered already above? I meant language objects, not Python objects. How this is implemented is another point. I hope that is aligned with your work on adding these abstract base classes.

- symbolic domains/function spaces,
- symbolic terminals,
- tensor-valued expressions,
- index notation,
- differential operators,
- DG side restrictions,
- integration measures,
- integrals,
- and forms.

This is enough to describe ordinary weak forms such as mass, stiffness, elasticity, Stokes, mixed Poisson, and DG forms.

## 6. What does not belong to the minimal language

The following are not primitive language concepts:

- actual mesh connectivity,
- actual coefficient vectors,
- basis tabulation,

> - quadrature-loop generation,

Reviewer 2: The loop isn't part of the language, I agree,  but should the notion of a quadrature rule be?

Reviewer: I think we should revisit this list once UFLx can generate kernels for a few problems - we can then see what is needed and decide where things belong:

- in the UFLx core
- in a UFLx extension
- in a code generator (ie FFCx)

- form compilation,
- assembly,
- solver setup,
- boundary-condition application,
- expression simplification strategy,
- code generation.

These are consumers or transformations of the symbolic language, not the core language itself.

## 7. Extensibility of the attributes

> Legacy note: In legacy UFL, the set of static attributes is fixed and hardcoded. This led to many language features being hacked in (e.g. complex numbers support, dual spaces, etc.).

> In UFLx, the set of static attributes is extensible. This allows for cleaner language extensions in the future, such as support for physical dimensions, dual spaces, error estimates, custom quadrature rules, custom integrability/continuity rules, etc.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't dual spaces be implemented right away rather than as an afterthought? I think they fit very well with the general abstraction of UFLx.
